[Music]
so let's get started with creating our
very first shell script so i would use
va editor to create these scripts but
you are welcome to use any other editor
with which you are comfortable but try
it out by using a command line editor so
that you can open a terminal and within
the terminal you edit the script and
also try it out how does it function
so where am i right now i am in my home
directory so let me start writing
some script within this directory itself
so i start opening a
file using the va editor
so i would say my script one so s1
and usually most of the shell scripts
should have some ending so that
immediately we can recognize what type
of a file it is so
sh is an ending for batch scripts so we
will have that as our
file extension
and i can start typing by first entering
the
insert mode so i press i to go to the
insert mode and then
as a custom i would also mention that
it's a shell script so i would write as
bin bash
okay
and then i can start writing some
commands here so i can add some comments
for my own reference so we can say s1
dot sh is
my first script
okay and i would just simply like to
echo something so i would
say hello world
and then i'm done with that so i skip
colon and then wq
okay i'm done with that now so let us
check
what does this contain it's a very small
script and you see that the default file
permissions are such that there is no
executable permission and we can already
try it out by sourcing it okay so we
will source it by using the dot command
dot
s1 dot sh so what it would do is the
shell would read the commands listed in
the particular script and then execute
them so you see that it has gone through
executed the
command which says echo hello world and
i mentioned to you
that the source is a nickname for dot so
you could also write source s1 dot sh
and then the same effect will be
seen
now we will go on to check whether they
are actually running in the same shell
or a different shell when we run as an
executable so for that we need to edit
it
and so let us go and try that out
so
i would say
the pid
of the
process
running this
script is
okay and then
i would like to mention the pid there
okay so now we are actually
checking the value inbuilt value of this
dollar dollar variable which is the
process id of the script which is
running
now we would actually so first let us
just check what would be the pid of the
particular bash shell so it says six
four four six so i would type ps and you
can see that the bash shell that we are
currently running has a pid of 64 46.
now when i source the s1.sh
it shows you the same pid number which
means that when you source a script then
the lines that are contained in the
script are executed within the same
shell as what we are
logged into
and running the script from
now we would like to execute this and if
you try to do that by giving the path so
current directory slash s1 s1.sh is the
correct way to launch it but when you do
that you are expected to see an error
the error is that permission denied is
it because we are not the owners that's
not true you can see that we are the
owners but
there is no executable permission and
that's why the error has come so we
already know how to give ourselves the
executable permission so i am giving
seven five five so that is full
permissions for my
the owner and then
read and executable permissions for the
group and for others and on the file
name s1.sh so then we go and see the
permissions so there is an executable
permission available and therefore we
now should be able to
execute this using the command
dot sh
okay and when you run you see that the
output is very similar the
hello world has been output correctly
the second
line of echo is also output correctly
but the pid number is different so which
means that when you did this what
happened is that when you typed
dot slash s1 dot sh the bash has spawned
another
child shell in which this script has
been executed and the child shell has
the pid number 10 955
now we can actually confirm this by
typing commands which show us the
process id properly so let us do that
now
so you know the outcome of the ps minus
minus forest it will tell you what are
the processes that are running and which
one is launched by which other process
etc so let us try the same command from
the s1 also
okay so i just put it there like that
so cat s1 dot sh so that it's there in
front of you what it is doing and we now
execute it
and you can see that
is
the process id of s1.sh
and
6446 is the parent process id and which
is a parent
so the shell that we are currently
logged into so you can see that when you
execute a script using dot by s1 dot sh
then a child shell is created and
therefore it is actually running as a
separate process and then once it is
completed the control is returned back
to parent shell so if you happen to make
any changes to the variables
or environment within that particular
shell then those will not be effective
now so let us just try that out
so i would create
a variable here so
myvar is equal to okay and let us say
give some string
okay and i would like to export so that
the variable is actually available with
any other shell after it
but we would actually see
that if you see
myware it is empty
i type
s1.sh it is executed
and
now i execute by actually displaying the
content of that shell so my wire is
actually available
then i will also now try if it's
available within my parent shell and you
see that it's not available which means
that any environment changes that were
done
in a script that is executed will not be
available to the parent shell but if it
was sourced it will be available so let
us just check that out now
source s1 dot sh and you see that it is
actually doing the same execution except
that the process tree you can see that
it is not a sub shell but it is actually
directly in the same parent shell and
therefore if you now
see whether the variable is available
then sure enough it is available so this
is very important to understand that the
baby the way you run a particular script
is it sourcing or is it executing
and you must be very clear which one of
the two types of behaviors is what is
required for you
now let us go ahead and try certain
other features which
tell us about the
inbuilt variables that are available
with let us say the dollar star
or dollar one dollar eleven and so on so
let us just try that out
so i will actually have the
comments to illustrate what is being
displayed so i would say
i am invoked
as
okay and then we would have
dollar
zero so dollar zero is supposed to be
the name of the file with which we have
invoked this particular
script okay so let us go ahead and run
it and you see that it says the way we
have invoked now where are we we are in
the home directory so we can also run
the script using the full
absolute path
and you see that when you run it as an
absolute path the way it was invoked is
also changing and in fact you can go
elsewhere and then try it out also you
can go to let us say user bin and then
from there i would use a relative path
so when i go
this way i have gone up to the root and
then i come down
and then i can run the
script and you see that
whichever way you have invoked
that particular string is being
displayed so it is one way by which
within the script you will know whether
you have been invoked
with
a relative path or an absolute path or
without
any path information also
now let us look at certain
other variables so i just keep this
output
there itself for the
name of the script so we will also go
ahead and
check out how many
arguments have been passed and if the
first argument is available let us go
ahead and print it
and i can say here echo
number of
arguments passed to the script
and here i would say echo
first argument past
is that
and then i would use
escape y enter to copy the two lines and
then print them here
and then replace cw to replace the word
second argument and here i would use
r to replace one single character two
and therefore we have edited the lines
by copy paste in vi editor so now let us
go ahead and try this out
now i don't pass any argument so it says
that there are zero arguments passed and
there is no error when you want to try
printing out the first and second
arguments they are not available so it's
a null that's all ok there is no error
out there
now we can give the words as follows so
you can say argument 1
and you see that the number of arguments
passed is 1 and it
says that the first argument is arc 1
and the second argument is null so now i
put arg2
and you see the second argument is
coming out quite nicely so when we
actually pass on
let us say
minus l file
then how the shell knows the arguments
that we are passing on is actually
through these variables so it knows that
minus l is one of the arguments and file
is another argument and the sequence
with which they have come is also known
because we know the positional
placement of the arguments on the
command line so to know that we can
actually write it in a different manner
and you see that the first argument now
is file and second argument is minus l
so the shell actually knows what all the
arguments you have passed and in which
sequence and therefore it can take
certain action within the script to
handle those options accordingly
now if you want to pass arguments
where the blank space is not to be
interpreted you could also do that
by using the
string possibility
now you see that arg 1 space arc 2 is
actually passed as a single string as
the first argument and then the second
argument is
null so you could actually compare that
with the behavior here where r1 and r2
are two different arguments the first
and second arguments namely so therefore
you can see that the way you have to
work out is by ensuring that the space
has to be recognized as a default field
separator now we can also override that
now let us
start
looking at certain loops also so we have
already learnt some of those
in the lecture so let us go ahead and
try that out now
so we will test whether the first and
second arguments are same
okay so if test
then
dollar one is the first argument
uh is it same as dollar two
okay
and if it is same
then
we would like to say
the two
the two arguments are same
okay fee
okay if they are same it will tell that
they are safe but otherwise nothing else
okay so let us just try this out
and
hello hello
and you can see that it has recognized
the two arguments and it's also telling
that they are same
now let us say i type hello and world so
the second argument is not the same as
first and therefore that particular
loop has been ignored because we are not
entering the
loop and i'll just show you
so this part
then and then feed this part we are not
entering because
this particular test condition has been
false because the two arguments are not
same and therefore nothing is happening
with respect to the execution so
after the
echo of dollar two nothing much has
happened okay so this is how you can
actually check now you can also check
how many uh
arguments have been passed so here is
the way i have modified the script a
little bit where we are first testing
for the number of arguments and if it is
less than 2 then i want to give an error
so let us just check that out how it
works
and you see that
the second argument is not there so
there is an error that says the please
pass more than 2 or equal to 2 arguments
and
if i actually pass on the argument
if i pass on two arguments then the
error is not displayed and the both
arguments are now displayed so you see
how we have edited the particular script
where we have made the operator usage
minus ge that is greater than or equal
to so only when the number of arguments
is greater than or equal to 2 then we
would like to compare the first and
second arguments so otherwise we would
not like to compare and so let us see
how this works
so you see that the two arguments
are taken and compared and the
output that the two arguments are same
is working out quite
well and let us say we
give different
words then that particular
check is not passed and therefore we are
not having the statement coming from the
nested
loop
so let me just show the script here so
you see that we are entering this part
here only when the arguments are same
and we are not entering the loop at all
if the arguments are less than 2. so let
us try that out
so we are just not even entering the
loop if the arguments are less than 2.
so that way the script is slightly
better to handle
the situations where there are two
arguments or more and the trend trying
to compare them etcetera
now let us try to write another script
s2 dot sh in which we would like to
explore some other kind of loops
so
bin bash
and here is where i would like to just
simply
try to use a for loop
so
echo
use of
for loop
and
what i would do is for
then i in then i need to give a list so
we can say r1 r2
r3
then do
echo dollar i
done so this is a very simple kind of a
script
so let us just try this out
chmod 755
s2 dot sh
now when we run you see that
all the three arguments have been
printed one after other because the loop
here is working to just do only echo
okay and each of these
are treated as separate values in a list
of three elements separated by a space
and therefore i is assigned
the values that are in this list and
then that particular value is printed
out
now this list can be provided not just
by having spaces and typed in
but it can also come from any variable
or output of a command also let us try
that out
so
we have already the shell expansion
possibilities so using the double dots
so let us try that out for example
file
underscore let us say
and we know that the braces can be used
to
have the expansions so i would have 1
then double dot
okay
so
cat s2.sh
so you see that what has happened here
okay so underscore and then the brace
expansion
has been used so that you go from one to
nine so file one up to file nine so we
have actually started
uh using the brace expansion to
automatically create a list and then
from that list every element is assigned
as a value to the variable i and then
that variable is being printed onto the
screen
now you could also combine this with
other kind of
expansions that we are familiar
so you would see that
we are actually having two expansions
and this means that from a to d and 1 to
9 so that is 4 into 9 okay so 36 lines
have to come and let us see if that is
the case
so you see that
from a1 to a9 and then b1 to b9 and so
on up to d9 has come now how many lines
have come
so 37 that's
the 37 because this is the additional
line so 1 plus 36 okay so you can see
that the brace expansions can be used
quite
well along with the
other features of the shell now you
could also do it with respect to the
command output so ls is a command for
which we have the output that we know so
what we would do is using the
expression like this ls slash bin
okay
now
every
file that is located in the slash bin
directory will be available as an
element of the array and then that will
be assigned to i and it will be printed
onto the screen
so let us try that out now
and you see that the list of output
coming from the
slash bin directory is being shown
and we can now go and edit this command
ls slash pin
in a way that
would help us to reduce that output so i
put
slash z star
okay so that means that i want only
those files in the bin direct which are
starting with the z character
so you can see that all the files in the
bin directory starting with z are listed
here because in our script we are saying
ls slash pin slash z star so this
command has been executed the output
which is what we have seen here
available as a array in this
line and therefore i is assigned a value
for each of these elements in the array
and then that is getting printed onto
the screen using the echo command
and
this particular feature common
substitution can also be achieved using
the back ticks which i am just showing
you now
see that the output would be identical
okay so either backticks or
dollar followed by a single parenthesis
can be used for command substitution as
we have illustrated right away
now one way by which you can learn about
cell scripts is to actually look at some
shell scripts that are already within
the linux environment so how do we find
that out so let us go to the bin
directory
and
there are many many files here
okay so
one of those commands which we know will
help us to understand whether the
particular file is a
script or a binary is
the command file
so file and then z new
so you see that it says there's a shell
script
now what we would do is
pipe it to
grep which we have already
seen
in the recent class to look for some
pattern so here we will say
shell script is the pattern so i would
like for that and if it was available it
would actually print it out now let us
say i use it for something else file
zoom
and it says it's a symbolic link so the
pattern shell script is not appearing in
the output of the command file and
therefore if i were to pass it on
with this then what happens is that
there is no output so null so which
means that i can actually use the
combination of a file
command on every file name pipe it to
grip and ask whether it is a shell
script to understand whether it's a
shell script or not so let us find out
how many files in the slash bin
directory are actually shell scripts
so for that we will go ahead and
write a shell script
okay echo
shell scripts in slash bin directory
okay
now we need to run through all the files
that are in slash pin so for that what
we do is
for
then the file is
let us say
i
in and then the list of files in the bin
directory i need so i would actually use
it like this
so this is a loop
and what do we need to do so first of
all let us just echo
the file name
to check whether the list of files are
coming properly
and
we would also then uh
type it out
the command that we were doing here here
file dollar i
grep
shell script
okay so
let us just try this out
cat s1.sh to just to see what is it that
we have written
so for every i in the list of file names
in the slash bin directory
what you have to do is print the file
name and then
get the output of the command file on
that file name and pipe it to grep
to check whether the output contains the
phrase shell script and if it contains
then print that out
so because the file name i is coming
relative to the slash bin directory we
need to put slash bin in front of the
dollar i so that the file name is given
with the full path and therefore the
file command would then work correctly
so let us go ahead and try this out
okay so
here is what the script is done so slash
bin slash file name
and that is the file that is being
processed with the file command and then
we are grabbing
the phrase shell script within the
output of the file command on that
particular file and if it is successful
then there will be a line that is
displayed otherwise only the file name
is displayed so let us try this out
and you see that the file names are all
getting processed and some of the files
are getting the output which we are
expecting
so
let that finish
so you could see that there are a
lot of
files that are
actually scripts and let us go ahead and
limit the output by not echoing the file
name and directly listing only what are
actually shell scripts so now the output
will be a little bit less so let us go
ahead and try this out
cat s1.sh so you can see that what i am
doing is i am not echoing the file name
i am only displaying the text if it was
a shell script otherwise don't do
anything so you see that now the output
will be much less
and only the shell script names are
being displayed on the screen
okay now how many lines came you could
also
analyze that and you could pipe it to a
file and then find out how many uh
scripts are there and then go on to read
each of them to understand
some of these you know features that
were used by the linux operating system
you could read these shell scripts to
explore various features of the bash
scripts as they have been used by the
linux operating system itself
and do not use super user permissions to
modify any of them because
you are
not supposed to touch them unless you
know what you are doing
you are welcome of course to copy them
to your home directory and modify them
to see how do they work but do read the
man page for that particular command to
see actually what are they supposed to
do
now i would also show you that we have
some
shell scripts that are processed
automatically sourced automatically when
we log into the bash
shell so here is one such example bash
rc in my home directory and this
actually has
various
commands that were being run when i
start the bash shell and it has loops it
has the if loop case loop
it has aliases and so on so you could
actually read these kind of scripts to
actually see what all the features that
are used in the bash scripting language
and then go on to explore some of those
in your own scripts
you